.TH SSETROOT 1 "13 October 1989" "X Version 11"
.sp
.SH NAME
.PP
.B ssetroot 
\- virtual desktop window parameter setting utility for X
.sp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\f3ssetroot [ -help ] [ -def ] [ -display \f2display\f3 ] 
.br
      [ -cursor \f2cursorfile maskfile\f3 ] [ -bitmap \f2filename\f3 ]
.br
      [ -mod \f2x y\f3 ] [ -gray] [ -grey ] [ -fg \f2color\f3 ]
.br
      [ -bg \f2color\f3 ] [ -rv ] [ -solid \f2color\f3 ]
.br
      [ -name \f2string\f3 ]\f1
.sp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \f3ssetroot\f1 program allows you to tailor the 
appearance of the background virtual desktop window on a 
workstation display running X with the \f3swm\f1\|(1) window manager.  
The virtual desktop feature of \f3swm\f1 need not be enabled; \f3ssetroot\f1
will work properly whether it is or not.  The function is essentially
the same as \f3xsetroot\f1 except that if the virtual desktop
is enabled the actions apply to it rather than the
root window.
.PP
Normally, you experiment with
\f3ssetroot\f1 until you find a personalized look that you like, then put the
\f3ssetroot\f1 command that produces it into your X startup file.  
If no options
are specified, or if \f3-def\f1 is specified, the window is 
reset to its default state.  The
\f3-def\f1 option can be specified along with other options 
and only the non-specified
characteristics will be reset to the default state.
.PP
Only one of the background color/tiling changing 
options (\f3-solid\f1, \f3-gray\f1,
\f3-grey\f1, \f3-bitmap\f1, and \f3-mod\f1) may be specified at a time.
.sp
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
The various options are as follows:
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-help\f1
Print a usage message and exit.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-def\f1
Reset unspecified attributes to the default values.  (Restores the background
to the familiar gray mesh and the cursor to the hollow x shape.)
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-cursor \f2cursorfile maskfile\f1
This lets you change the pointer cursor to whatever
you want when the pointer cursor is outside of any window.
Cursor and mask files are bitmaps (little pictures), and can be made with the
\f3bitmap\f1\|(1) program.  You probably want the mask file to be all black until you
get used to the way masks work.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-bitmap \f2filename\f1
Use the bitmap specified in the file to set the window pattern.  You can
make your own bitmap files (little pictures) using the \f3bitmap\f1\|(1)
program.  The entire background will be made up of repeated ``tiles'' of the bitmap.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-mod \f2x y\f1
This is used if you want a plaid-like grid pattern on your screen.
x and y are integers ranging from 1 to 16.  Try the different combinations.
Zero and negative numbers are taken as 1.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-gray\f1
Make the entire background gray.  (Easier on the eyes.)
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-grey\f1
Make the entire background grey.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-fg \f2color\f1
Use \f2color\f1 as the foreground color.  Foreground and background colors
are meaningful only in combination with \f3-cursor\f1, \f3-bitmap\f1, or \f3-mod\f1.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-bg \f2color\f1
Use \f2color\f1 as the background color.  
.TP 8
\f3-rv\f1
This exchanges the foreground and background colors.  Normally the foreground
color is black and the background color is white.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-solid \f2color\f1
Set the window color to \f2color\f1.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-name \f2string\f1
Set the name of the root window or virtual desktop 
to \f2string\f1.  There is no default value.
Usually a name is assigned to a window so that the
window manager can use a text representation when the window is iconified.
This option is unused since you can't iconify the background.
.PP
.TP 8
\f3-display \f2display\f1
Specifies the server to connect to; see \f3X\f1\|(1)\f1.
.sp
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\f3swm\f1\|(1), \f3X\f1\|(1), \f3xrdb\f1\|(1), \f3xset\f1\|(1)
.sp
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
Copyright \(co, ParcPlace Systems, Inc.
.sp
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Mark Lillibridge, MIT Project Athena
.br
Virtual desktop enhancement by Tom LaStrange, ParcPlace Systems, Inc.
